Captiva is the third studio album from Christian rock band Falling Up, released on October 2, 2007. The band recorded the album with Seattle producer Aaron Sprinkle, who also handled the production duties for the band's debut, Crashings.
As opposed to the band's first two albums, Crashings and Dawn Escapes, Captiva is more alternative and experimental rock driven as a whole, similar to some elements that were present on Dawn Escapes, but much less hard rock-driven, and continues to show a change in the band's musical direction. It also features much less distorted guitar rhythms, and nearly all turntable effects present on previous albums are omitted. It is also the first Falling Up album to feature the same line-up as their previous one, Exit Lights, although this line-up would be short-lived, as guitarist Micah Sannan and keyboardist Adam Taylor would depart from the band in late 2007.
"Hotel Aquarium" was the album's first single. "Goodnight Gravity", "How They Made Cameras", "A Guide to Marine Life", and "Maps" have also been posted on the band's PureVolume page. The album reached the Billboard Top Christian albums chart peaking at No. 19 and reached the Top Heatseekers albums chart peaking at No. 7. It has sold just over 20,000 copies worldwide.


== Track listing ==
All tracks by Jessy Ribordy except where noted
"A Guide to Marine Life" - 4:02
"Hotel Aquarium" (Ribordy, Aaron Sprinkle) - 2:45
"Goodnight Gravity" (Sprinkle) - 3:22
"Captiva" - 3:30
"Helicopters" - 3:50
"Maps" (Ribordy, Chris Stevens, Sprinkle) - 3:26
"How They Made Cameras" - 4:07
"Good Morning Planetarium" (Ribordy, Sprinkle) - 3:15
"Murexa" (Ribordy, Randy Torres) - 2:56
"Drago or the Dragons" - 4:23
"Arch to Achtilles" - 4:47
"The Dark Side of Indoor Track Meets" - 5:39


== Credits ==
Jessy Ribordy — Vocals, Keys on tracks 2, 3, 6, and 9, Synths
Micah Sannan — Guitar
Adam Taylor — Keys, Background Vocals
Jeremy Miller — Bass
Josh Shroy — Drums, Loops


== Additional personnel ==
Recorded and Produced at Compound Recording (Seattle, Washington)
Mixed by J.R. McNeely at Elm South Studio, (Franklin, Tennessee)
Mastered by Troy Glessner at Spectre Studio
Aaron Sprinkle - Producer, Engineer, Guitars on tracks 2, 3, 6, and 9
Randy Torres - Engineer, Guitars and Bass on tracks 2, 3, 6 and 9
The Busha Fusha Disaster - Drums on tracks 2, 3, 6, and 9
Chris Carmichael - String Arrangements, Performance, and Recording


== Singles ==
"Hotel Aquarium"
"Goodnight Gravity"
"Good Morning Planetarium"
"Maps"


== References ==


== External links ==
E-Card