Codan Limited is a manufacturer and supplier of communications, metal detection, and mining technology, headquartered in Adelaide, South Australia with revenue of A$132.3 million (2014).
Codan Limited is the communications business unit and the parent company of the Codan group, which is engaged in business through its operating segment Radio Communications. This product range is sold to customers in more than 150 countries. In addition to its global service and support network, the Codan group has regional sales offices in Washington D.C., (USA), Victoria, BC, (Canada) Chicago, IL, (USA), Farnham (UK), Beijing (China) and Dubai (United Arab Emirates). The company maintains quality assurance systems approved to the ISO 9001:2000 standard.
On June 30, 2012, Codan Limited sold its Satellite Communications assets to CPI International Holding Corp, and its wholly owned subsidiary CPI International, Inc (CPI).


== Codan Radio Communications ==
Codan designs and manufactures a range of HF equipment including transceivers (base, portable and mobile), modems, power supplies, amplifiers, antennas and accessories. It also provides HF solutions ranging from basic voice communication to data, email, fax, chat, GPS tracking, and interoperability according to FED and MIL standards.
Codan’s HF transceivers were initially developed to provide communications for people living, working and travelling in central Australia. Codan has been a supplier of HF Radio products to aid and humanitarian markets since 1980. Other markets include the public, private and security sectors, as well as a significant recreational vehicle user market in Australia. Codan military HF Radio transceivers comply with MIL-STD-188-141B ALE (JITC Certified) and FED-STD-1045 ALE, are interoperable with other military grade radios, and provide frequency hopping and voice encryption. Codan is a supplier to the US Army and has provided around 3000 transceivers to support security and rebuilding programs in Afghanistan and Iraq.
On September 13, 2011 at the DSEi industry conference, Codan announced a branding change to the HF Radio division. Renaming the division "Radio Communications", "to reflect a broader focus by the Company on integrated radio communications systems".
On June 11, 2012 at Eurosatoty (International Defence and Security tradeshow), Codan Radio Communications announced the launch of the Codan Envoy — a software-defined radio that enables users to add new capabilities to the radio through software updates.
On August 7, 2012 Codan announced the acquisition of Daniels Electronics Limited (Daniels), a leading designer, manufacturer and supplier of land mobile radio communications (LMR) solutions in North America. It has since launched tactical solutions such as Stratus (P25/LTE) and HiveNet (P25) transportable repeaters for secure mobile voice operations.


== Minelab ==
Minelab specialises in advanced electronic technologies including detection equipment for military and humanitarian de-mining projects. They also produce metal detectors for the consumer market. The company has manufacturing, distribution and customer service operations in Adelaide (Australia), Cork (Ireland) and Las Vegas (USA), and is an ISO 9001:2000 Quality Endorsed Company. Minelab was established in 1985 and was acquired by Codan in March, 2008.


== Minetec ==
Minetec is an established technology and service partner to the mining industry. The company provides integrated safety, productivity and communications solutions for surface and underground mining operations, including advanced tracking, mine operations management and collision avoidance systems.


== References ==


== External links ==
Related company websites
Official Codan website
Codan Radio
Mine Lab
Codan Minelab International Distributor
Toko Detektor Emas Minelab

Mine Tec
Codan HF VSAT Microwave