AB Electrolux (commonly known as Electrolux) is a Swedish multinational home appliance manufacturer, headquartered in Stockholm. It is consistently ranked the world's second-largest appliance maker by units sold (after Whirlpool). Electrolux products sell under a variety of brand names (including its own), and are primarily major appliances and vacuum cleaners intended for consumer use. The company also makes appliances for professional use.
Electrolux has a primary listing on the Stockholm Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the OMX Stockholm 30 index.


== History ==

The company originates from a merger of two companies—Lux AB and Svenska Elektron AB. The former an established manufacturer and the latter a younger company founded by a former vacuum salesman who was also a former employee of the former firm. The origins of Electrolux are closely tied to the vacuum, but today it also makes major appliances.


=== Sales company to major manufacturer ===
In 1919 a Svenska Elektron AB acquisition, Elektromekaniska AB, became Elektrolux (the spelling was changed to Electrolux in 1957.) It initially sold Lux-branded vacuum cleaners in several European countries.
In 1923, the company acquired AB Arctic and subsequently added absorption refrigerators to its product line. Other appliances soon followed, including washing machines in 1951, dishwashers in 1959, and food service equipment in 1962.


=== Mergers and acquisitions ===
The company has often and regularly expanded through mergers and acquisitions.
While Electrolux had bought several companies before the 1960s, that decade saw the beginnings of a new wave of M&A activity. The company bought ElektroHelios, Norwegian Elektra, Danish Atlas, Finnish Slev, and Flymo, et al., in the nine years from 1960 to 1969. This style of growth continued through the 1990s, seeing Electrolux purchase scores of companies including, for a time, Husqvarna.


==== Hans Werthen ====
Hans Werthen, President and later Chairman of the Board, led the strategic core of an increasingly decentralized Electrolux—and was instrumental to its rapid growth.


==== Restructuring ====
While attempts to cut costs, centralise administration, and wring out economies of scale from Electrolux's operations were made in the 1960s and 1970s with the focus so firmly on growth, further company-wide restructuring efforts only began in the late 1990s.


=== A public company ===

Electrolux made an initial public offering on the London Stock Exchange in 1928 (it was delisted in 2010) and another on the Stockholm Stock Exchange in 1930.
Currently, its shares trade on the NASDAQ OMX Nordic Market and over-the-counter. Electrolux is an OMX Nordic 40 constituent stock.


=== 2000 to present ===
In North America, the Electrolux name was long-used by a vacuum cleaner manufacturer, Aerus LLC, originally established to sell Swedish Electrolux products. In 2000, Aerus transferred trademark rights back to the Electrolux Group. Aerus stopped using the Electrolux brand in 2004. Before 2000 Electrolux-made vacuums carried the Eureka brand name, and while Electrolux continued to make Eureka-branded vacuums after it regained the right to use its own brand, it also began selling Electrolux-branded vacuums, too. Electrolux USA customer service maintains a database of Electrolux-made vacuums and provides a link to Aerus in case an Electrolux-branded vacuum cleaner was made by Aerus.
Keith McLoughlin took over as President and CEO on January 1, 2011, and became the company's first non-Swedish chief executive.
In August 2011, Electrolux acquired from Sigdo Koppers the Chilean appliance manufacturer CTI obtaining several brands with the purchase including: Fensa, Gafa, Mademsa and Somela.


== Notable products ==

1919: The Lux vacuum is the first product Electrolux sells.
1925: D, Electrolux's first refrigerator, is an absorption model.
1937: Electrolux model 30 vacuum is unveiled.
1940: Assistent (Swedish for assistant), the company's only wartime consumer product, is a mixer/food processor.
1951: W 20, Electrolux's first home washing machine, is manufactured in post–World War II Gothenburg, Sweden.
1959: D 10, the company's first dishwasher, is a counter-top model nicknamed "round jar".
2001: Launch of the Electrolux Trilobite, a robotic vacuum cleaner.


== Brands ==

Electrolux sells under a wide variety of brand names worldwide. Most of them were acquired through mergers and acquisitions and only do business in a single country or geographic area. The following is an incomplete list.
Europe
AEG
Atlas[:da] (Denmark)
Corberó (Spain)
Dometic, appliances for RV's, also uses the Electrolux logo. Based in Sweden and owned by Dometic Group, itself owned by EQT Partners since 2011.
Elektro Helios, manufacturer of consumer appliances for the Swedish market
Faure, French consumer appliance maker
Lehel, consumer appliance brand sold in Hungary and elsewhere
Marynen/Marijnen, consumer product brand sold in the Netherlands
Parkinson Cowan, cooking appliances (UK)
Progress, vacuum cleaner brand sold throughout Europe
REX-Electrolux, Italian appliance manufacturer
Rosenlew, consumer product brand sold in Scandinavian countries
Voss, premium consumer cooking appliance and equipment supplier in Denmark and elsewhere
Zanker, consumer kitchen appliance brand sold in central Europe
Zanussi, Italian appliance manufacturer that became part of Electrolux in 1984 
Zanussi Professional, professional kitchen equipment manufacturer
Zoppas, consumer products brand sold in Italy
Australia and Oceania
Dishlex brand sold in Australia
Kelvinator, commercial refrigerator and freezer brand sold in Australia and elsewhere
Simpson, consumer appliance brand sold in Australia
Westinghouse, a kitchen appliance brand in Australia licensed from Westinghouse Electric Corp to Electrolux Home Products Pty Ltd.
North America
Electrolux ICON, premium consumer appliance brand sold in the US
Eureka, American consumer vacuum cleaner brand
Gibson, refrigerator and air conditioning manufacturer
Philco, former U.S. consumer electronics manufacturer, though brand name is also used separately by Philips Electronics
Sanitaire, commercial product division of Eureka
Tappan, former U.S. appliance manufacturer
White-Westinghouse, former U.S. appliance manufacturer
Latin America
Fensa, Chilean consumer appliance brand, widely available in Latin America.
Gafa, Argentinean appliance manufacturer.
Mademsa, Chilean home appliance brand
Prosdócimo, refrigerator, fridge and air conditioning brand sold in Brazil
Somela, Chilean home appliance brand, available throughout Latin America
Middle East
King, Israeli kitchen appliance brand made by REX-Electrolux, an Italian Electrolux subsidiary.
Olympic Group, home appliance brand in Egypt
Global/other
Arthur Martin-Electrolux
Beam, Electrolux's central vacuum brand
Castor
Chef
Dito, professional food processing equipment
Electrolux Laundry Systems
Electrolux Professional
Frigidaire, full range major appliance brand sold globally
Juno-Electrolux, premium consumer kitchen appliance brand
Molteni, professional stoves
Tornado, vacuum cleaners and other consumer products
Therma
Tricity Bendix
Volta, vacuum cleaner brand sold in Australia, Sweden and elsewhere
Wascator, now under Electrolux Laundry Systems
Note: This list does not include brands such as Kenmore and John Lewis, which may sell Electrolux-produced appliances but are not owned by or affiliated with Electrolux, as Electrolux acts as an OEM for these brands.


== Slogan ==
The company's current international slogan is "Thinking of you".
In the 1960s the company successfully marketed vacuums in the United Kingdom with the slogan "Nothing sucks like an Electrolux". In the United States it was frequently assumed that using this slogan was a brand blunder. In fact, the informal US meaning of the word was already well known in the UK at the time, and the company hoped the slogan, with its possible double entendre, would gain attention.


== Controversy ==
In 2003 the US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission resolved a complaint that Muslim workers at the St. Cloud factory were not allowed a sufficient number of breaks to observe their daily prayers.
In 2010 and again in 2011 complaints against the company were filed by Muslim workers in Electrolux's plant in St. Cloud, Minnesota, with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The 2010 complaint, that workers were not able to observe Ramadan, was resolved. The 2011 complaint stems from the 30-minute breaks agreed to in 2010 being later reduced to 20 minutes by Electrolux.


== See also ==

Constructor Group AS, a former Electrolux subsidiary not involved in major appliance manufacture


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Official group website
American Electrolux - The Beginning, and the Early Years by Charles Richard Lester