Kolobos (also known as Haunted House) is a 1999 American independent horror movie that was directed by Daniel Liatowitsch and David Todd Ocvirk. The film was released on September 28, 1999 through Armitage Pictures.


== Plot summary ==
The film begins with a couple coming across a severely wounded girl that can only utter the word "kolobos". The film then cuts to a few days prior where the same girl, an artist named Kyra (Amy Weber), has agreed to take part in an experimental film. The film will have several different people living together for three months while the cameras record their interactions. Her artwork, which are inspired by a creepy faceless entity, disturb her new housemates. The group gets along well until night time, when a series of deadly traps pick them off one by one. Also hunting the group is the entity from Kyra's dreams, which prompts some suspicion from some of the survivors. Eventually all but Kyra die and she is then shown cutting herself with a blade she finds in her bathroom. She's then shown making a phone call to place an ad for a group of people to come and tape an experimental film, identical to the one the initial group responded to when they came to the house. It is left ambiguous as to whether or not the events in the film happened, what Kyra's part in it was, and whether or not the faceless entity exists.


== Cast ==
Amy Weber as Kyra
Donny Terranova as Tom
Nichole Pelerine as Erica
John Fairlie as Gary
Promise LaMarco as Tina
Ilia Volok as Faceless
Simms Thomas as Dr. Waldman
Todd Beadle as Dr. Jurgen
Mari Weiss as Lucille
Jonathan Rone as Carl
Linnea Quigley as Dorothy
Ivan Battee as Det. Byers


== Reception ==
Critical reception for Kolobos was mixed to negative, with the Fresno Bee panning the film overall. Beyond Hollywood gave a mixed review where they heavily criticized the film's acting but stated that overall it was a "worthwhile viewing experience". In contrast, DVD Verdict praised the film's acting and commented that Kolobos had "replay value".


== References ==


== External links ==
Kolobos at the Internet Movie Database